feat(scoped-elements): add scoped elements feature (#1185)
open-wc/open-wc: packages/scoped-elements/README.md

# Scoped elements

[//]: # 'AUTO INSERT HEADER PREPUBLISH'

Complex Web Component applications often are developed by several teams across
organizations. In that scenario is common that shared component libraries are
used by teams to create an homogeneous look and feel or just to avoid creating
the same components several times, but as those libraries evolve name collision
problems between different versions of the same library appear because teams are
not able to evolve their code at the same velocity. That causes bottlenecks in
software delivery that should be managed by the teams and complex build systems
trying to alleviate the problem.

[Scoped Custom Element Registries](https://github.com/w3c/webcomponents/issues/716)
is a proposal that tries to fix that problem, but until is ready and we could
use a polyfill in those browsers that do not implement it, auto scoping the

> custom elements is a workaround.

Reviewer: Could you rewrite this paragraph? Its not very clear

Author: Check out if it's clear now

This package allows you to forget about how the custom elements are defined
inside the registry. It's going to register them for you, scoping the name if

> necessary avoiding the class name collision, and allowing you to use different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
necessary avoiding the class name collision, and allows you to use different
```

versions of the same component in your code.

## Installation

```bash
npm i --save @open-wc/scoped-elements
```

## How it works

`createScopedHtml` is going to define the custom element classes and creates a
unique scoped tag for each of them if needed. In case those classes were
previously defined then it's going to return the previous defined tag.

Then, the `html` function provided by the `createScopedHtml` method is going to

> it's going to transform the template literal into another one replacing the tags

Reviewer: is going to it's going to? Can you rewrite this?

Author: I just rewrited it

  'my-panel': MyPanel,
});

export default class MyElement extends LitElement {
  static get styles() {
    return css`
      .my-panel {
        padding: 10px;
        background-color: grey;
      }
    `;
  }

  static get properties() {
    return {
      text: String,
    };
  }

  render() {
    return html`
      <my-panel class="my-panel">
        <my-button>${this.text}</my-button>
      </my-panel}>
    `;
  }
}
```

## When to use it

If you are creating a custom element that depends on other custom elements then
you should use `@open-wc/scoped-elements` to forget about how those custom
elements are defined in the registry and which tags are using.

```js
// MyElement.js
import { LitElement } from 'lit-element';
import { createScopedHtml } from '@open-wc/scoped-elements'; // <-- import the autoDefine and html functions
import MyButton from './MyButton.js'; // your custom element depends on it

const html = createScopedHtml({ 'my-button': MyButton });

export default class MyElement extends LitElement {
  render() {
    return html`
      <my-button>Click me!</my-button>
    `;
  }
}
```

## When not to use it

> In the case you are developing a custom element that doesn't depends on other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are developing a custom element that doesn't depend on other
```

> custom elements then you shouldn't use it. The reason of that is because there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
custom elements then you shouldn't use it. The reason for that is because there
```

> is a little performance penalty on using it, and it's better to avoid it if you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is a small performance penalty for using it, and it's better to avoid it if you
```

       <my-panel class="my-panel">
         <my-button>${this.text}</my-button>
       </my-panel}>
     `;
   }
   ```

### Complete example

```js
import { css, LitElement } from 'lit-element';
import { createScopedHtml } from '@open-wc/scoped-elements';
import MyButton from './MyButton.js';
import MyPanel from './MyPanel.js';

const html = createScopedHtml({
  'my-button': MyButton, // <-- bind the element with a tag in your html
  'my-panel': MyPanel,
});

export default class MyElement extends LitElement {
  static get styles() {
    return css`
      .my-panel {
        padding: 10px;
        background-color: grey;
      }
    `;
  }

  static get properties() {
    return {
      text: String,
    };
  }

  render() {
    return html`
      <my-panel class="my-panel">
        <my-button>${this.text}</my-button>
      </my-panel}>
    `;
  }
}
```

### What if I need to use the component tag?

Sometimes we need to use the component tag name, for example, if we want to do a
`querySelector`. In that case there is a `getTags` function available that receives
a collection of component classes and returns a collection with the tag names
used in their definitions.

```js

> import { getTags } from '@open-wc/scoped-elements';

Reviewer 2: If we want to support compiling away scoped elements, we need to think how this will interact with it

Reviewer 3: compiling at all is not possible with this as it depends on customElements registry to look if it has a registered element for this so all this will only work in the browser if your bundler shims complet browser environment including customElement registry then sure you can :)

Reviewer 3: to compile this away you would need something like its getUniqTagName function on the bundler side that would need to inspect the whole JS ast and do the replacements this can be done via webpack or rollup for example if you do it in the bundler this is not needed

this works only at runtime and is not bundle able or lets say compile away able.

Reviewer 3: i have my own framework called tag-html i covered near all expectable scenarios about ssr and lit-html and any other webcomponent implamentations.

Reviewer 2: You can compile away the runtime regexp.

Author: I´m resolving it because it's outdated

import { ComponentA } from './ComponentA.js';
import { ComponentB } from './ComponentB.js';

> const [componentA, componentB] = getTags([ComponentA, ComponentB]);

Reviewer 4: I am not sure if we wanna expose getTags 🤔 

what happens if we use both?
```js
const html = createScopedHtml({
  'my-button': MyButton, // <-- bind the element with a tag in your html
  'my-panel': MyPanel,
});

const [tagMyButton, tagMyPanel] = getTags([MyButton, MyPanel]);
```

are we sure that it is always the exact same thing? and even if... the API seems confusing to me 🙈 

if we wanna expose it - how about
```js
const { html, tags } = createScopedHtml({
  'my-button': MyButton, // <-- bind the element with a tag in your html
  'my-panel': MyPanel,
});

document.querySelector(tags['my-button']);
```

Author: Yes, it´s the same thing. I think we must expose the tags in some way but I like your proposal using `createdScopedHtml`.

I´m going to do the code changes.

Reviewer 3: tags don't need to get exposed in a complicated way you can simply return from createScopedHtml the WeakMap or in your case map and get the ElementName via the Class. also you don't need to expose the original class names in your config.

Reviewer 2: Can we hold off on this for the first release? We need to see how this works with the build plugin.

Reviewer 4: agree let's hold of with that for now but make it an object so we can later add "something" if needed?

```js
const { html } = createScopedHtml(...)
```

Author: I already did the modification returning the tags in the object. Could we hold it with that or you prefer a rollback to the previous one?

Reviewer 2: I think we should go with `const html = createScopedHtml(...)` to start off, and evaluate if the other things are needed later and when we know if and how we want to deal with compiling parts of this away. The listed use cases in the docs can be solved with css classes, ids or attributes.

Reviewer 4: indeed...

Author: Yes, that's true. I'm going to rollback to that version without the `getTags` function.

Reviewer 2: Sorry I dont mean to devaluate your work, I want nothing more than this feature to succeed !

Author: No worries, I understand you. And it´s true that users can use css classes, ids or attributes to cover that functionality. Let´s see if it´s really needed in the future. I really appreciate your comments.

The less code the better.

Author: I just updated the PR. Let's see if it's ok as a start point now.

Consider the following setup

- **Team Blue** owns **Page A**
- **Team Green** owns **Page B**
- **Team Black** owns **Feature A & B**

1. Everything is good and [your app is live](https://open-wc.org/scoped-elements/demo/before-nesting/) [[code](https://github.com/open-wc/open-wc/tree/master/packages/scoped-elements/demo/before-nesting)] with both pages.
2. **Team Black** releases a new version (**2.x**) of **Feature B** which unfortunately needs to be breaking in order to support new use-cases.
3. **Team Blue** (on **Page A**) does not use any of those new use cases and they have a tight deadline to meet so they can not update right now.
4. **Team Green** (on **Page B**) has to deliver an important functionality to your end users but they need to upgrade to **Feature B 2.x** since it can only be solved with this new version.
5. Since **Feature A 1.x & 2.x** are both used in the same app, this will lead to nested dependencies, which then will lead to [catastrophic failure, and errors](https://open-wc.org/scoped-elements./demo/no-scoping/) [[code](https://github.com/open-wc/open-wc/tree/master/packages/scoped-elements/demo/no-scope)].

Two possible solutions come to mind:

> 2.  Temporarily (!) allow to ship similar source code (most breaking releases are not a total rewrite) and scope them via `@open-wc/scoped-elements`; see the "fixed" example [with-scope](https://open-wc.org/scoped-elements/demo/with-scoping/) [[code](https://github.com/open-wc/open-wc/tree/master/packages/scoped-elements/demo/with-scope)] running with nested dependencies.

Author: ops! It should start by the number 1 ;)

import MyPanel from './MyPanel.js';

const html = createScopedHtml({
  'my-button': MyButton, // <-- binds the element to a tag in your html
  'my-panel': MyPanel,
});

export default class MyElement extends LitElement {
  static get styles() {
    return css`
      .panel {
        padding: 10px;
        background-color: grey;
      }
    `;
  }

  static get properties() {
    return {
      text: String,
    };
  }

  render() {
    return html`
      <my-panel class="panel">
        <my-button>${this.text}</my-button>
      </my-panel}>
    `;
  }
}
```

## Limitations

1. Components imported via npm **MUST NOT** be self registering components. If a shared component (installed from npm) does not offer an export to the class alone, without the registration side effect, then this component can not be used. E.g. every component that calls `customElement.define`

   ```js
   export class MyEl { ... }
   customElement.define('my-el', MyEl);
   ```

   Or uses the `customElement` typescript decorator

   ```ts
   @customElement('my-el')
   export class MyEl { ... }
   ```

   Only side effects free class exports may be used

   ```js
   export class MyEl { ... }
   ```

>    Note: not share or components within the main app shell are exempted from this rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Note: This rule does not apply to components that you write, and are in control of yourself and do not come from a third party library.
```

Author: As I said in my previous comment this note refers to how you must share your component.

I think a good practice is export the component class and define it in separate files, like in Lion library, so when you are going to use the component you can decide to use the self-registered one or register it using scoped-elements feature.

Author: I think is better to remove this paragraph by the moment to avoid confussion, don't you think?

Reviewer 3: as i pointed out if we add a check if the returned class from customElements get is === KlassToRegister we can simply ignore all that .

Reviewer 4: this was about that in your app shell (or your main app) you do not need to care about using scoped-elements... e.g. self registering elements are fine in that case... as these component are always unique to the app and can never become double-loaded...

but yeah maybe that is too much in depth... maybe it needs a full app example to get this concept clear 🙈

2. Every (!!!) component that uses sub components need to use `scoped-elements`. Any import to a self registering component can result in a browser exception - completely breaking the whole application.

3. Currently, only `lit-html` is supported (though other rendering engines could be incorporated in the future)

> 4. You can not use tag selectors in css

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. You can not use tag selectors in css, but you could use a class name instead
```

Author: I changed it to

4. You can not use tag selectors in css, but you could use an id, a class name or even a property instead.

   ```css
   🚫 my-panel {
     width: 300px;
   }
   ✅ .panel {
     width: 300px;
   }
   ```

> 5. You can not use tag names using javascript querySelectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. You can not use tag names using javascript querySelectors, but you can query for the class name instead
```

Reviewer 3: he can also get the uniqeTagName via the class it self simply run its getTags function it is already auto registering getTags(class) => uniqeTagname

Reviewer 3: the scope part is only extra sugar that supplys a default prefix for the new uniqe tagName

Reviewer 2: We don't export a `uniqeTagName` or `getTags` function.

Author: I changed it into:

5. You can not use tag names using javascript querySelectors, but you could use an id, a class name or even a property instead.

# Scoped elements

[//]: # 'AUTO INSERT HEADER PREPUBLISH'

:::warning
This is an experimental feature use it at your own risk and be sure to understand it's [limitations](#limitations).
No bigger applications is using `scoped-elements` - so there is no prove yet if it works in production.
This page focuses a lot on in depth explanations as it should help foster a discussion on scoping.
:::

> Complex Web Component applications often are developed by several teams across organizations.

Reviewer: as an aside, why does every line have a 'manual' line break? Why not just let the paragraph run?

Author: It's because my IDE setup. I could change it if it's a problem.

2. [no-scope](https://open-wc.org/scoped-elements/demo/no-scoping/) [[code](https://github.com/open-wc/open-wc/tree/master/packages/scoped-elements/demo/no-scope)] Feature A version 1.x and 2.x are imported via self registering entry points which leads to the following error message as "feature-a" tries to register multiple times

   ```
   Uncaught DOMException: Failed to execute 'define' on 'CustomElementRegistry': the name "feature-a" has already been used with this registry
     at [...]/node_modules/page-b/node_modules/feature-a/feature-a.js:3:16
   ```

3. [with-scope](https://open-wc.org/scoped-elements/demo/with-scoping/) [[code](https://github.com/open-wc/open-wc/tree/master/packages/scoped-elements/demo/with-scope)] Successfully "fixing" the demo by using `createScopedHtml` on Page A/B.

## How it works

`createScopedHtml` is going to define the custom element classes and creates a
unique scoped tag for each of them if needed. In case those classes were
previously defined then it's going to return the previous defined tag.

> Then, the `html` function provided by the `createScopedHtml` method is going to

Reviewer: This really needs a better explanation. Can someone take a look at this? @manolakis @daKmoR @LarsDenBakker

Author: I applied @thepassle suggestion with a better explanation.

   import MyPanel from './MyPanel.js';
   ```

3. Create the `html` function defining the tags you want to use for the
   components.

   ```js
   const html = createScopedHtml({
     'my-button': MyButton,
     'my-panel': MyPanel,
   });
   ```

4. Use your components in your html.

   ```js
   render() {
     return html`
       <my-panel class="panel">
         <my-button>${this.text}</my-button>
       </my-panel}>
     `;
   }
   ```

### Complete example

```js
import { css, LitElement } from 'lit-element';
import { createScopedHtml } from '@open-wc/scoped-elements';
import MyButton from './MyButton.js';
import MyPanel from './MyPanel.js';

const html = createScopedHtml({
  'my-button': MyButton, // <-- bind the element with a tag in your html
  'my-panel': MyPanel,
});

export default class MyElement extends LitElement {
  static get styles() {
    return css`
      .panel {
        padding: 10px;
        background-color: grey;
      }
    `;
  }

  static get properties() {
    return {
      text: String,
    };
  }

  render() {
    return html`
      <my-panel class="panel">
        <my-button>${this.text}</my-button>
      </my-panel}>
    `;
  }
}
```

> ## Limitations

Reviewer 5: Although it might be expected, I would add as a limitation: 
- that all dependencies should be NPM dependencies
- that all references should use node resolution

Reviewer 4: hmm I do not think it matters where you get your dependencies from?
as soon as it is double-loaded (be it nested npm or same file via different imports or a micro architecture with some double loading)

Reviewer 5: I think it depends. 🙈 You are right by saying it should be double-loaded (or multi-loaded for that matter). If you use Bower to package the components, you won't be able to multi-load. But it's true that within a project it doesn't matter. 😃   
When I mentioned "dependencies", I was talking about packaging strategy, especially valid for the multi teams example.

1. Components imported via npm **MUST NOT** be self registering components
   If a shared component (on npm) does not offer an export to the class alone, without the registration side effect, then this component can not be used. e.g. every component
   that calls `customElement.define`

   ```js
   export class MyEl { ... }
   customElement.define('my-el', MyEl);
   ```

   or uses the typescript decorator `customElement`

   ```ts
   @customElement('my-el')
   export class MyEl { ... }
   ```

   only side effects free class exports may be used

   ```js
   export class MyEl { ... }
   ```

>    Note: not share or components withing the main app shell are exempted from this rule.

Reviewer: What does this mean? "Not share or components" ? Can we rewrite this?

Reviewer 3: It should mean nothing as it can be total ignored he was trying to point out that if there is already a component defined with a tagname then this will try to register it also which has no negativ impact at all.

Reviewer: Then it should be removed

Author: How about

Note: not shared components or those withing the main app shell are exempted from this rule.

Reviewer: What exactly do you mean with shared components? Isnt that the point of this library?

Author: mmm probably it's a bit confusing. Maybe "Those components that are not going to be shared in a library are exempted from this rule."

Reviewer 3: Ok maybe i am missing something but as soon as this is merged i could add some extras from my code base i  for example check if the element that i get is the same class that i already wanted to register to dedub registration and this 

registration helper should not care where dependencys come from global dependencys are most time self versioning via namespaces look for example into lit-html it places a lit version var on the global scope

in this registration component you can completly ignore what your users are doing this has only one goal 

RREGISTER A NEW Component under a Uniq NAME or Return the Already Registered thats it all other dependes to the developers choice if he chooses to use global dependencys he is free to do so this will never replace scoped registry and scoped registry will also never handle global modules 

as scoped registry is not Isolate Components 

a pattern for isolated Components with a individual global scope can be also supplyed via IFRAME it adds a extra window object to the script that it can use and then we could deepCopy the Elements i have even a algo that does copy the event listners and all that which clone node and import node would ignore.

Reviewer 3: Ah Maybe the section should point out that this helper is best used with customElements that are coming from a 3th party ???? to make sure they don't  use a already registered tagName?

We Could also add some other interristing part a Loader !

This could even load a customElement and shim customElement calls via setting a scoped customElements Proxy object it don't needs to be a real JS Proxy but i choose this name as it does good explain what it should do it should simply reference this helper as customElement.define()

most self registering modules will have the line customElements.define()
if we wrapp that into import() call where the function that does the call has a local customElements Proxy it will get used!.

Other method is to use for example my esm-loader and simply remove calls to customElements.define.

Author: Ok, I think I'm misunderstanding something and also I apologize because my English level doesn't help to explain myself.

This note is referring to the first point.
>1. Components imported via npm **MUST NOT** be self registering components. If a shared component (installed from npm) does not offer an export to the class alone, without the registration side effect, then this component can not be used. E.g. every component that calls `customElement.define`

What it means is that if you are building a component that is susceptible to be used by third parties (which basically means that is going to be imported by other packages), you must **export the component class without registering the component in the registry**, so the third party would be able to use this feature registering the component safely.

If you are creating your components in the same package as the application shell then, probably, you are not going to share or distribute them, so you could register them in the same way you always do.

>Ok maybe i am missing something but as soon as this is merged i could add some extras from my code base i for example check if the element that i get is the same class that i already wanted to register to dedub registration and this

@frank-dspeed sorry but I'm not sure if I'm understanding you well. This feature is checking if the class or the tag are already registered. Each custom element class is going to be registered only once, and its tag is going to be reused by all their references.

Reviewer 3: @manolakis that is not correct for example when some one does not bundle and is using components like
<script src="" type="module">
<script src="" type="module">
<script src="" type="module">
your map will not get reused as its scoped to the module context not the global context all 2 modules will register a indipendent version. of the Same Class 

so your code needs customElements.get()  === Klass 

to verify if it is already the same class that gets returned.

Reviewer 3: also it would be a good idea to drop the scope registration in favor of a uuid tagname and a global weak map the weakmap should get any uniqe name could be even a cryptic one to make sure it will never exist by any other module then this can get reused over all instances to make sure that registration happens only once for a customElement version that is all it is made for 

get uniqe tagname vor a customElement version based on the global context the customElement version can be validated via 2 ways first way ist customElement.get() === Klass and the secund more effective is class.toString() === customElements.get().toString() 
and then clean up that string so that white space and that don't matters as long as the code is the same content.

Reviewer 3: Its importend maybe to point out that ESM has a global module registry that means when you import a from 'a' in one script and import it in a other you get the same module.

Reviewer 2: Importing the same module twice will return the same module, that's one of the main points of modules.

Reviewer: Alright, I completely lost the plot here 😄 Can we try and keep the discussions somewhat focussed?

> 2. Every (!!!) component with sub component needs to use `scoped-elements`

Reviewer 5: As this is an important limitation, it might be useful to add a reference to the use case?  
Specifically, Team Black should implement or should have implemented `scoped-elements` for both version 1 as version 2 of Feature A when using custom elements internally. (as well as any other feature that team exposes, ie Feature B)

Also, not sure if it is a separate limitation, but Feature A and Feature B should not use any global dependencies, only real ES modules.  
ie. if Feature A uses `DOMPurify`, and updates to a breaking version of `DOMPurify` in Feature A v2, it wil be breaking, as `DOMPurify` is installed in the global namespace. (module wrappers might not always do the trick)

Reviewer 3: Global Scope is not handled at all with this this is only about registration of customElements under a uniq tag maybe uniqElement Tag is even a better name thats how i called it in my framework

Reviewer 5: You're right.  😃 
But unfortunately, it's not only about the registration of customElements. As explained in the documentation, sub node_modules will be used to allow multiple versions. This means that if the breaking change (of Feature A) is a breaking change in a sub dependency (eg.`DOMPurify`), now, all of a sudden, both versions of `DOMPurify` will also be (tried to be) loaded in the same way. This will often lead to unexpected issues (global variables being overriden, global events being hit multiple times, ...), where before the loading of the global variable was only done once.  
Now, as long as all dependencies are real ES modules with no outside dependencies, it *should* not have unexpected consequences. So, this is more about a consequence of using multiple versions.

Reviewer 4: added a Limitation: "Imported elements need to be fully side effect free (not only element registration)"

│ Benchmark       │ Bytes      │            Avg time │  vs lit-element │ vs scoped-elements │
├─────────────────┼────────────┼─────────────────────┼─────────────────┼────────────────────┤
│ lit-element     │ 185.99 KiB │ 110.89ms - 117.84ms │                 │             faster │
│                 │            │                     │        -        │            0% - 8% │
│                 │            │                     │                 │     0.13ms - 9.6ms │
├─────────────────┼────────────┼─────────────────────┼─────────────────┼────────────────────┤
│ scoped-elements │ 190.12 KiB │ 116.02ms - 122.44ms │          slower │                    │
│                 │            │                     │         0% - 8% │           -        │
│                 │            │                     │ 0.13ms - 9.60ms │                    │
└─────────────────┴────────────┴─────────────────────┴─────────────────┴────────────────────┘
```

## Special thanks

This package was initially inspired by [carehtml](https://github.com/bashmish/carehtml) and I would like to
thank [@bashmish](https://github.com/bashmish) for his work on it.

> Also I would thank [@daKmoR](https://github.com/daKmoR) and [@LarsDenBakker](https://github.com/LarsDenBakker)

Reviewer 3: hahahah mixing kanye west in is a nice joke from you :D

> Also I would thank [@daKmoR](https://github.com/daKmoR) and [@LarsDenBakker](https://github.com/LarsDenBakker)

Author: Ok, fair enough.
